---
layout: post
title:  "Tlön, Uqbar, East Village"
date:   2016-01-11 00:10:00 -0500
categories: jekyll theme
location: New York City 
---

"You know, when I met you I thought your name was Luis Borges", says Ryan, my
new friend at the co-working space, "I think you'd really like him, he writes
very cerebral fiction", I feel a mix of awe at his ever more evident culture and
shame at my not knowing about a fellow latin american who's apparently a writer
of import and sort of my namesake; however, Ryan's kindness is conducive to me
taking this mix quite well, so I nod and smile in acquiescence -- and make a
mental note to check this Borges character out.

A stroll to Strand is not an unwelcome journey, not one I haven't made
frequently in the couple of months I've been here this time around: as a lone
and mostly socially inept and woefully introspective traveler, my solace is in
books these days -- music waxes and wanes in protagonism here, but books seldom
have done. Borges is not obscure: I find a $7 collection of short stories in the
staff picks tables, and being relatively (read, very) broke and dithering about
whether I'll like this guy or not, I eschew a more expensive and comprehensive
edition in spanish in favor of this slimmer and somewhat cheaper option. My haul
that day, in spite of my limited budget, can't have been limited to this humble
Borges volume, but, with apologies to the other books which I surely devoured in
time, I forget.

An equally forgotten number of days after, as I slow roast in the August sun
that shines with the disdain of a wronged subway rider and wait for the bus that
will take me from alphabet city to union square, I find myself engrossed in the
mysterious world of the first story in that little tome: "Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius", about a fictional world that was painstakingly concocted by anonymous
characters in such a fashion as to slowly take over the real world; a tale
itself told in such ambiguous semi-factual terms as to also seem intended to
distort reality. I'm enthralled. The rest of the day finds me looking forward to
lunch break or leaving the co-working space so I can sit on the subway, or even
walk through a park, engorging more of the strange fantasy fodder that Borges
had such mastery in producing.

Borges was with me as I got to know Ryan and Ian better, as we taught computer
science together in the co-working space where I met them. He was with me when
Romy and I started having more adventures together: talking until late in that
forlorn East Village room I was subletting, crashing in her friend's place one
night spontaneously and waking up to a beautiful bath of sunshine coming through
the blinds of that strange abode, itself full of Escher and Bach, wherein I sat,
on the floor, reading more Borges, reveling in the peace of my new friend
sleeping and all my fears momentarily allayed by the more pressing concerns of
the circular ruins or the garden of the forking paths. He was with me as I left
the East Village to stay in Washington Heights and the Upper West Side, and I
returned to strand for the umpteenth time to by the spanish edition of the
Aleph. And the Aleph was with me, physically and figuratively, as I finally
returned home, to my own reality, to being Luis Borjas.
