---
layout: post
title:  "The Musical Offering"
date:   2016-04-26 22:46:00 -0600
categories: tgu essays
location: Tegucigalpa, Honduras
---

I only had the 12 lempiras it took to pay the cab to go back home, and my music
book. I had taken the wrong cab out of the bookstore and had ended up on the
other side of the city. I had had an altercation with my dad in the morning, I
was full of regret and anger at being challenged in my nascent independence, but
I also had Bach's The Well Tempered Clavier in Urtext version and all was good.

College in Latin America is an experience that may seem quaint to the American
mind: we stay at our parents' house, treat it mostly like an extension to high
school, and under the aegis (and in conflict with) our family, we shed the
cocoon of teenage angst and face the full extent of our identity: we clash with
our peers, we forswear our belief systems, we grapple with the idea of having
our own income and responsibilities beyond the sanitized cradle of the
educational system. For late bloomers like me, who not only spent his teenage
years in the double bubble of an all-boys catholic school and a very evangelical
church of which I was an enthusiastic participant -- the thirst to believe truly
took part of it but I suspect I also clung to the ability to be exempt from
facing such fearsome rites of passage as partying; it also meant a time of
discovering the opposite sex face to face, without gods and schools in betwixt.

A significant part of my journey in finding my identity back in high school had
revolved around music: upon discovering my uncle's Yamaha guitar and listening
to my dad's recordings of Los Indios Tabajaras -- which in themselves were a
memento of his own audiophile father -- I became deeply interested in the
instrument and spent many hours while visiting my uncle trying to extract sounds
of its arcane mechanism of wonder while parsing his old battered guitar theory
book. That same year, by sheer fate, the music class at school moved on from its
recorder-only instruction to a diversified set of courses focusing on keyboards,
guitar and the old reliable recorder for those who didn't care much; I jumped at
the opportunity to take guitar despite the minor quibble of my lacking such an
expensive instrument knowing that fate would come to my aid again if my true
calling was the guitar, and it did: another uncle had a very old guitar laying
around which he didn't mind lending me, and thus I came across my first paramour
in a guitar with a bent neck making the action about half an inch high and the
acoustics terrible, adorned with stickers and an inexplicable zebra print acting
as a makeshift pickguard; but I didn't care about the pain and risible
ergonomics of such an instrument, I practiced with zeal, learning all
the songs with a fiery perfectionism. Soon, as with all my learning endeavors
that turn compulsive, I was looking for music to learn and fell into the
temptation of Satan: despite being a fervent christian and having limited myself
to listening only christian rock, I had been listening to "wordly" music before
and knew that they, surely to seduce and ensnare the just, tended to have more
texture and complexity in their musical arrangements; I approached one of my
least satanic classmates and asked for a recommendation, he produced the
Apocalyptica albums where they cover metallica -- we still circulated cassettes
back then, mind you, so most of my journey here involves good old magnetic
piracy -- and I listened in awe, making weekend trips to the internet café to
download ASCII tabs, save them on floppy disks and then painstakingly transcribe
them to notebooks because printing was an expensive dream in the internet café,
reserved to important homework, and then trying to follow along with the
liberally arranged Apocalyptica covers and miraculously learning Nothing Else
Matters by Metallica in this fashion, interspersed with some riffs from
Californication by Red Hot Chili Peppers.

At this point, as in a Christian documentary against the evils of the world, I
had fallen in the slippery slope of the music of the devil: no longer satisfied
with a replica of Metallica, I started listening to the real thing and hanging
out with the other guitar enthusiasts, spending our recesses practicing and
talking about life (of which I had none so I just replied in uncommitted
witticisms or fabricated anecdotes), in complete awe of both the music they were
acquainted with and the lives they lived: I had unwittingly found a group I
belonged to beyond just being classmates or fellow churchgoers, and despite our
wildly differing life experiences, we connected with music every day. 

One morning, sitting next to some kid I barely knew on the bus to school, I
correctly appraised his ownership of a Discman, and was rewarded by my excellent
sleuthing by being offered an earbud, a glimpse into his portable private world;
curiosity and gratitude prompted me to lodge a still earwaxed piece of plastic
in my sacrosanct ear canal and as soon as the music began I stopped caring about
the dubious hygiene of this decision: this was rock, this was metal, but it was
far more melodic and complex than my puny experience before it, this was fucking
Iron Maiden. This was the good stuff, this was the hard drug of Satan and I
could smell the sulphur and it smelled great. For the first time ever, I saved
up 20 lempiras and asked the Discman man to burn me a copy of this glorious
opus, and I listened to it in rapt attention in the sanctuary of my room
blasting it from the tiny speakers of my hewlett packard computer (I didn't dare
use the sound system in the living room, lest I opened the gates of hell) for 30
minutes every afternoon after arriving from school before my mom showed up with
my siblings, and then in my new fangled earphones as soon as I procured one, my
obsession deepened, my acoustic guitar -- I had finally convinced my dad to buy
one, a $100 Suzuki with surprisingly beautiful acoustics and a bright orange
body that made me both self conscious and proud for the rest of the first year
of my tryst with music -- wasn't enough anymore, I had my eyes set on an
electric guitar.

And thus by the end of high school, merely three years after I had first put my
hands on a guitar, I owned a silver/black Hohner stratocaster replica, a small
10W Marshall amplifier, a Metal Zone pedal, a budding collection of devil music
and more than two black garments, and a very deep conflict between my fate and
the sensuous world of Baal. But it was in this cognitive, and frankly sometimes
auditive, dissonance that I spent the three months between high school and
college in my grandma's house with the family having moved in there to nurse my
mom's multiple leg fracture completely devoted to discovering and enjoying more
music, making more frequent trips to the internet cafés, broadening my horizons
with the likes of power metal and its kin -- Sonata Arctica, Nightwish,
Therion, Stratovarious, Yngwie Malmsteen, Angra, Manowar, even extreme metallers
like Children of Bodom -- and allowing me to connect, always surreptitiously and
in shy defiance of my faith, with interesting characters in church and the
internet.

So by the time I set foot in college campus, I saw myself as a metal musician, a
badass guitarist, a guy that wore black but didn't wear actual band tees because
they were expensive and too risqué for my christianity. Music was my bridge,
however, my way of condensing my own self and presenting it in a package that
was understandable by others, and, if they chose to open it, a way in which I
could find kindred spirits for my passion of not only listening to music but
also learning how to make it, how to speak its language, how to find its traces
in literature and science; I easily connected with another couple of guys in my
introductory algebra class, but a girl I had been seeing for a few days in our
vicinity, wearing, like me, dark shades but not going full metal and sporting a
shy pentagram (actually the HIM symbol) on her blue messenger was a more
interesting, and way scarier, connection to make. A couple of days later I
concocted a plan to sit next to her, behind one of my metal buddies, and talk
loudly with the latter about our favorite bands, hoping she would chime in. And
she did, quickly becoming one of my closest friends -- and opening an eight year
relationship that would go through all sorts of travails before even becoming
romantic years after we graduated and to end in all kinds of hurt and a
thankfully amicable and absolute rupture. But back then it was the simple fact
of a shy boy building a bridge with music towards a shy girl, and finding the
treasure of the shared quest within: she was a far more experienced pirate than
I had become at that stage, and we shared our ever increasing loot and discussed
it at length until one day she mentioned that her dad was a big enthusiast of
all things classical and I, wanting to impress her, said "oh yeah, me too, I'm
totally into Beethoven and like Mozart too, they're great". She saw a need for
me to delve into this world and, instead of more metal, gave me her sisters
music appreciation class CD for me to hear samples of many centuries of fine
art music. Stubborn and proud as always, I didn't want to be told what to do and
who to listen to when beginning my exploration of a genre, so half to prove
myself as a smart music listener and half to impress her with my mad music
arcana, I found non mainstream composers like Hector Berlioz or Dmitri
Shostakovich and, soon, was hooked again.

True to my metal persona up to that point, I saw classical music as a boring but
necessary precursor to melodic metal, a fossil sampled and remixed sometimes by
my heroes, but never something worth listening in itself; how wrong I was: here
I was, surrounded by exceedingly complex and pure soundscapes, with textures,
timbres, colors and layers I wouldn't have dreamed of, unaided by electronic
gimmicks and not beholden to formulaic album or radio conventions; music that
lived in pure form in paper and which any group of competent musicians could
bring to life, music that encompassed the entire continuum of human emotion and
could convey one to the depths of hell and the heights of heaven, a language
that far surpassed the symbols that expressed it, the cultures that gave it
birth, the people and machines that produced it, the very air it made dance;
this was a language I wanted to speak, I was obsessed again. I was again
conflicted. Not only did my faith continue to melt in a maelstrom of
uncertainty, my interest in the guitar and metal had ebbs and flows of the
security of my persona as a metal musician and my newfound obsession in the
language of music and its more sublime expressions.

For a couple of years I gave both camps equal airplay, for metal connected me to
my peers more easily -- people from both church and college came to my house to
jam, and to see my new Ibanez guitar -- but at the beginning of my senior year
at college a radical turn of events came to pass. For most of my teenage years I
had been afflicted with ever worsening acne, and the rigors of computer science
had wreak havoc on my face to such an extent that I consented to a course of
treatment based on pills recommended by my dermatologist which required a
commitment of 6 months, a heavy investment by my parents and came with a long
list of side effects and precautions, with a heavy emphasis on the fact that my
acne would be worse during the first few months and that I should avoid long
periods of exposure to the sun. I took the first three months of my treatment as
a complete withdrawal from people, rationalized as just avoiding the sun but
frankly rooted in a plunging self esteem as the condition worsened, and found
myself cloistered in a room full of music and books. 

During the months of my treatment I started reading more music theory, bought
music paper to transcribe Rachmaninov and Chopin to the guitar, continued the
keyboard practice I had abandoned when I was 8 years old due to my younger
brother always disrupting it with his youthful shenanigans, pirated the entire
oeuvre of Beethoven to sit still in the dark listening to his symphonies, piano
concertos and assorted pieces while applying cold compresses of soothing
medication to my swollen face; discovered, via a blog called "El Cuervo López",
the likes of Bruckner and Kalinnikov, as well as the fascinating world of the
rest of the Mahler catalog beyond the symphonies and how it could all change
depending on the conductor: there I knew that Beethoven's 9th by Karajan was
basically a different piece than the 9th by Furtwangler or Klemperer. And, by
way of the 32 piano sonatas by Beethoven, I eventually discovered the beautiful
world of Glenn Gould's Bach: a Bach that didn't sound like old church music but
that instead was music stripped to its very essence, a lone keyboard more
mesmerizing than an entire orchestra, an interpreter with an intriguing story, a
wellspring of creativity that moved me to write poetry, to paint with
watercolor, to write short stories and continue to transcribe music and practice
instruments, to seek with a depth unprecedented this same essence, now nude and
patent, in arts I had erstwhile failed to understand as peers to my goddess
Music: painting, film, the joy of human contact.

I emerged from my self-exile with an exuberance I couldn't have predicted
before, I realized that my moribund faith had to be put down and retired from
church, I declared my love to my musical friend and was rejected and didn't care
much because I had found this joyous light withing, I reconciled metal and
classical and listened to both as I drove to the gym, to the lab to work on my
ambitious dissertation project, to my part time job as a programming lab
instructor and my full time job as an intern for a budding software firm. My
best friend at the time, also co-worker in the aforementioned firm, gave me
Gödel, Escher, Bach as a birthday present and it seemed to bring together
everything: music, computer science, my flirting with the arts. I signed up for
piano lessons and learned how to play Chopin's Prélude 15 (raindrop). I had been
to what could have been the depths of hell in my lonesome company and was now in
the heights of heaven, but saw it all as one crescendo as music had been with
me. 

Ebbs and flows are a constant, and for years after I would not know again such
accumulation of first-time joys, but I knew others: I traveled to New York City
and Berlin and saw their orchestras and opera companies perform, I met a jazz
musician on the subway, a piano player whose birthday was the same as mine in a
park, and a cello player who almost brought me to tears with Elgar on the
street, I saw Tchaikovsky's piano concerto both in NYC and at home in
Tegucigalpa, I walked the promenades of Vysehrad and saw the graves of Dvorak
and Smetana and saw the sun dancing in the tranquil waters of the Vltava while
listening to Ma Vlast , I cried to myself listening to a violin sonata and
watching the sun rise from a plane descending into Schipol, I kissed the love of
my life for the first time while listening to a cover of Wish You Were Here by
Pink Floyd, I fawned over the memorabilia scattered in the fine Bachhaus museum
in Eisenach, I saw a small asian lady punch a tall and scrawny metalhead in a
concert, I kindled friendships by taking acquaintances to extremely loud metal
shows, I dressed up for operas, I bought a seven string guitar, I had periods of
renewed obsession with playing an instrument and introduced my sister to Bach
and my siblings to stringed instruments with such fervor that they now play at
their church's band. 

I may not have become a musician, or ever graduated from a wistful noodler still
aghast at the arcana that allows some of us to speak her language and some to be
enthused, but mute, listeners , but in 20 years of flirting with music she has
become a constant companion, a balm, a reference for moments or periods of my
existence , a bridge to others, to myself, and to that which is worth sticking
around for in life. 
