---
layout: post
title:  "Europa"
date:   2016-04-18 08:00:00 -0400
categories: travel essays
location: Houston, Texas
---

T and I took each other to Europe for our two year anniversary, and, like any
trip, too many thoughts flooded my mind during the entire two week sojourn to
not at least try to make note of some of them. 

## Houston

I sit with a silly grin on my face as I ride the subway that travels between
terminals at the Houston Intercontinental Airport: I took the train going in the
wrong direction and now I have to sit through it doing the whole loop between
the Marriot stop towards terminals A, B, Marriot again, C and finally my
intended destination, terminals D and E. But I don't complain: I have time, this
is my commute to the airport, I have slept a cozy and long night amidst plush
pillows and covers, I have had fresh fruit and omelette made by a fellow latin
american, a chef (who taught me that one puts sauces on top of the food to let
it enhance it -- "One needs to learn how to look for the best taste"). My 15
hour layover had, in short, all I could ask for: in addition to a good night's
sleep -- yet perhaps overpriced, due to the hotel's location -- the passport
control queue was short, the officer friendly, the dinner of steak and wine
tasty and the interaction with other people reduced to a nice minimum; and just
now, the morning of my flight back to Tegucigalpa, I found a confusingly
non-existing line for security and an empty waiting area at my gate, perfect for
staring out of the window at the overcast skies and extremely wet outside that
has been announcing itself via fearsome alerts to my phone and my own
masochistic submission to the hyperbolic utterances of the weather channel --
sprinkled with tornado and flash-flood alerts accompanied by ominous piercing
tones.

Contrast that with my arrival to Houston on my way to meet T in Europe, 2 weeks
ago: perfectly clear skies, but almost two hours in the passport control and
security line, surmounting anxiety due to my next flight, to Frankfurt, leaving just two
hours after my arrival -- and a sliver of hope that it would be delayed which
would be granted in spades: it ended up being delayed almost four hours, we left
at 10 pm grumpy, hungry, sweaty and sleepy. 

Contrast that again with the flights themselves: the flight to Frankfurt was
only 8 hours, I had a bulkhead window seat which gave me legroom and the absence of
people in front of me to deal with, no one sitting in the middle seat and my
rowmate was a scion of silence and respect of personal space; the eight hours
flew by, with a surprisingly tasty dinner, a movie; about four hours of blissful
sleep that probably looked ridiculous due to my vaguely phallic inflatable torso
pillow and then another movie -- I didn't even finish that second movie. 

The flight *from* Frankfurt was ten hours that challenged the very definition of
eternity: an obnoxious italian couple behind me who spoke during the entire
flight and who kept poking at the screen at the back of my seat as it had
insulted each and every century and heirloom that Italy has bequeathed onto the
world, a middle seat occupied by a peaceful but oversized bearded fellow who, in
the quiet courtesy of those accursed by such a seating situation, tried to keep
to himself but overflowed onto my side and sequestered my tray under his
armrest. I watched all the movies I could think of, struggled through a good
chunk of the french version of Ignorance, by Kundera, that I purchased in Paris
and even discovered the tasteful mix of the R40 live record by Rush who
distributed the abundance of percussive instruments manned by Neil Peart amidst
both stereo channels. But I had free access to the lavatory and used it
whenever my stomach adapted to the pressure changes brought about by the
altitude and my bladder announced a work well done by the kidneys.

Air travel is an exercise in self restraint, a test of one's values and
courtesy, a challenge to one's grasp of civilization: from using the lavatory to
sharing the cruelly shrinking seats and money-grabbing stratagems by airlines I
shall not mention but whose hub is in the vicinity of Houston, Texas; it's a
conundrum where one's own privilege must be checked: the system of castes and
ranks set by airlines plays with the civilized impulse of excusing disdain and
rudeness with having a better seat, premier access, a reservation at a fancy
hotel; it's a showcase of our own fabrications that set us apart: better
luggage, VIP tags in small rolling suitcases, the well dressed crew versus the
sweatpant and hoodie clad, the scrawny youths in cargo pants and hiking
backpacks versus the sports jacket posse blazing through the airport with a
suitcase stacked atop a rolling harcase; it's a test on one's own thresholds of
endurance for loss of comfort: neck pillows, removal of shoes during the entire
flight, scarves and blankets over fully reclined snoring masses; or the spartans
who sleep sat upright or in the waiting area. It highlights the virtues or vices
of group organization: from the numerous families to the flocks of asian
tourists, human herding reaches a peak of stress in the hallways of the modern
airport.

We take ourselves from point A to point B and have made not only the journey,
but also the journey to the journey a microcosm where we can shine or plunge
into darkness. The mind of a weary traveler who has endured a transcontinental
flight can find it challenging to soar amongst the highest values of human
endeavor and maintain a sense of unity and find himself thinking only of
comfort, of misanthropy, of the artificial boundaries that, by the petty art of
setting apart, make him feel better than some and thus better about his sweaty,
hungry, sleepy, exhausted self. What remains in that dark terminus of the
journey -- that's what makes his character.

Who am I to my fellow travelers, who are they to me? Are we still brethren after
all we've gone through in this admittedly still cozy form of travel? Has this
sanitized yet demanding environment torn us asunder or brought us back together,
as when travelers band in affinity groups after a minor air travel tragedy like
a delayed or cancelled flight? Maybe these are just banal questions, but the
fact that airports are a microcosm rich in learning opportunities for
people-watchers, that I think remains uncontested.

## Frankfurt


