---
layout: post
title:  "Gracias, Lempira"
date:   2016-02-21 01:35:00 -0600
categories: tgu essays hiking
location: Tegucigalpa, Honduras
---

That's not a phrase of gratitude to the honduran currency, the _Lempira_, or the
wronged hero after whom it was named, rather, a location: Gracias is the capital
of one of Honduras's western departments, Lempira. Like many settlements in this
mountainous country -- our orography resembles a crumbled sheet of paper --
Gracias sits cradled in a valley under the majestic shadow of the _Cordillera de
Celaque_ mountain range, in direct sight of the _Cerro las Minas_, the
highest peak in Honduras at 9420 ft., part of one of our biggest national parks, the
_Parque Nacional Celaque_. In the past couple of years this little town has been
getting quite a lot of attention: it has been touted as a destination for
eco-tourists and people interested in the vestiges of the colony, and it's
received a major infrastructural boost by the executive power itself, since the
president hails from the region. Hip restaurants, renovation of the old streets
and buildings, improved security, the opening of a hot springs establishment and
of course a revamp of the beautiful national park count as its boons to the
weary traveler who's willing to drive, or take a bus, far enough from any of the
two major cities to take the better part of a day to get there. It has even
opened a little airport, albeit with a rocky start: the very first test flight
out of it, highly televised, had a malfunction and crashed minutes after going
airborne. Bittersweet as most signs of progress in our little corner of the
isthmus.

But this preamble only tries to paint a hopefully fair picture of a little town
that's received some love from the tourist industry, and high praise from
hondurans who've made the trek (on a spotless, recently renovated highway), and
contrast it with the fact that, even though my family and I have been meaning to
go since the president was sworn in and two of my very best friends seem to have
been going there quite often since they reached the summit of Cerro Las Minas in
new year's, I just hadn't been able to translate myself there, until this
weekend.

Careful readers who commit everything to memory and have gone at least a couple
posts back and read that before this, will vividly remember that on February
13th, a Saturday, I made my very first long distance hike on very demanding
terrain under the scorching sun and, being unfit and stubborn, I grimaced in the
face of death (or at least the less tragic but infinitely more shameful
alternative of puking and passing out), making it out miraculously, and
pointedly, alive. Wise readers would expect me to have rested my sore muscles
and overtaxed mind the next day, and even the day after since it was President's
day; but alas, too much wisdom seldom leads to adventure, so the careful and
wise will be aghast at discovering that the tale that follows starts on the very
next morning after the long walk, at 6:45 to be precise.

I've never had the scientific privilege to actually weigh some lead and feel its
density exert my muscles, but I would wager that the effort it took to open my
eyes that morning wouldn't be far from trying to lift a brick of the stuff; I
felt tired, sore, lazy and even a little bit sick from the chill of the morning,
but I had committed to receive my friends at 8 and depart, jolly and energized,
towards Gracias. So I hauled myself from the bed, donned my hired hat, and,
finding much to my surprise that not only did my legs and arms still respond to
my commands with as much precision as an early morning allows, they weren't
actually that sore; so on I went to brew coffee, eat some actual breakfast
prepared by my saintly mother and then, after successfully exhorting my bowels
to confess their sins on a pew of porcelain, took a quick shower and jumped into
the same pants and socks as the previous day -- which not only felt still clean
after 26 kilometers of sweat and despair, they _smelled_ clean, no wonder I'm
getting a touch obsessed with these performance fabrics -- and received my
friends not a minute past 8:30. They had to wait for me downstairs for most of
my morning rituals, the poor devils.

After my dad and Carlos achieved the remarkable feat of engineering that was to
fit Carlos's long-bed pickup truck in our modest garage, we jumped into the
pristine interior of the recently washed car my family allows me to take to
these unkind trips on rugged land and departed, not a minute past 8:45, which is
quite early for hondurans, or at least a Borjas: our custom is to leave at the
very least three hours later than announced, so 45 minutes felt like just a
margin of error.

I'm not the best, or most frequent, of drivers, but I try to be careful (after,
five years ago, having been involved in two very car-wrecking crashes in the
space of six weeks); so it always puzzles me how my friends happily acquiesce to
me driving them long distances. Granted, this time we had agreed that someone
else would drive since I would be tired, but I felt okay and it feels me with
dread and paranoia to give my car to someone else, though I think everyone else
was a more experienced driver than me. Drivers, by definition, are irrational,
so I really just try to fit with the pack. Nevertheless, the road from here to
Siguatepeque, one of the major towns in the department of Comayagua and which
sits almost halfway between Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula, and marks the point
where one stops going north and heads west, is the very best road in the
country: well maintained, well lit, beautifully signed, and actually designed to
allow commuting between cities and minimize the likelihood of being involved in
gruesome accidents due to narrow lanes, sinkholes, unexpected sharp turns, rock
faces, cattle, trucks, impromptu soccer matches, boulders whose final
destination seems to have been right where a sharp turn ends, and many other
honduran features that dominated this major vein of traffic for many years,
until the government decided it would be nice to communicate the two biggest
cities without having people obliterate their wheels and collect dents and scary
anecdotes on a daily basis. The road is now pretty snazzy and relatively easy to
drive in, is the gist of it, so I didn't completely feel reckless subjecting my
friends and myself to my meager driving skills on it.

A drive in Tegucigalpa on a Sunday is a breeze, a drive out of Tegucigalpa and
north amidst the beautiful pine forests of the western outskirts of the city
with no traffic whatsoever, a blue sky and pleasantly chilly air whistling by as
one cruises at the maximum speed allowed (by the easily scared heart of yours
truly as well as the government), is paradise in a can. Add to that some
enjoyable banter with friends and it's no miracle that we barely even felt time
pass between our departure and our first stop: Granja D'Elia in Siguatepeque.

Granja D'Elia is an italian oasis in the middle of the forests of Comayagua:
ever since I can remember, and that's at least 20 years of memories driving
north on this selfsame road, it's been there offering a buffet, a cafeteria, a
bank, a couple of stores with things vacationers may have forgotten, a
well-stocked mini mart with local necessities and italian delicacies, a rustic
decor half inspired by Honduras, and half by Italy, and, most importantly:
clean, working, restrooms (it even has a hotel and a zoo, but in 20 years I've
never set foot in either, nor have I dipped it in the pool they installed a
while ago). Upon writing this I must admit that I've never looked into the
european genesis of the place, one day, on another trip, I shall. What I do
know, however, is that countless hondurans stop here for a meal and a leak, and
that's exactly what I did.

Hungrier than I thought, I choose a cornucopia of food from the buffet, and
inhaled it in a manner contrary to my parsimonious modus operandi in regards to
eating, while gossiping with my friends about people I haven't the foggiest
recollection of, possibly because I spend the least amount of time possible
outside, and socializing is a thing that has been relegated to my trips outside
of the country, or, more worryingly, with plants, rocks and the sky as of
late. Once everyone's tummies were full (and a couple were triumphantly
unladen), we set off once again.

Now, up until Granja D'Elia and beyond, to the north, I have 20 years of
familiarity with this road: I've only driven it once have been a passenger
countless times, a couple of kilometers after our stop, however, I had to take a
turn on the west-bound road and into new territory, and hoped for the best. I
should've hoped harder: an hour of very hilly, but still well maintained and
beautifully surrounded, driving, we hit Intibucá, a department famous for its
cool weather -- given its placement high in the mountains -- and, as if to
maintain the department's fame, we were greeted with miles of ever denser fog,
mind you, it was almost noon at this point, so not only did I have to drive on
this road for the very first time, I also had to lose my fog-driving virginity.
Somehow we made it to La Esperanza, one of the bigger towns in Intibucá, and
upon descending to the valley where it sits, the fog mercifully stayed behind. 

I have been to La Esperanza a couple of times, at least 10 years ago, and didn't
remember a single thing about it other than its being cold; now, having to drive
through it to continue on our way to Gracias, I hoped to revive some memories
and bring them to the fore, alas, none did, and the part of the town we had to
drive through wasn't memorable either: a clean but otherwise forgotten
colonial town, with cobblestone streets, low houses and throngs of Sunday
pedestrians, that resembles many others in the country. More on La Esperanza in
a bit, however. For now, we were glad to have left its busy streets and, again,
be on a decent road surrounded by mountains. 

Before taking the detour to the road that goes all the way to the El Salvador
border, Yamil told us a story of how once he got confused and drove past towards
the next big town west, Camasca, and, apart from meeting a bleeding hitchhiker
who had all the looks of having been the one better off in a brawl, stumbled
upon one of the most beautiful vistas in Honduras. Captivated by this, unfairly
represented here, tale, we drove on. A few miles in, when the road started
getting uncivilized, we parked and, true to Yamil's tale, took in one of the
crispest views of nature I've ever had the privilege of witnessing: wide valleys
spotted by green patches of farms, a lattice of dirt roads, the shadow of low
clouds, a deep blue sky, and a deeply green coat of pine trees festooning the
high peaks. Photographs were taken, expletives of admiration liberally proffered
and episodes of sehnsucht sighed, all being interrupted by a shady looking truck
that appeared out of nowhere in the otherwise deserted road and parked a few
paces behind us. Glad to had had the foresight to leave the engine running, we
boarded with concealed panic and vamoosed back to the detour to Gracias.

The road to Gracias descends from the highlands of Intibucá to the valley, which
means a change of vegetation and climate, a welcome diversion from the restless
gray of the pavement. From what I hear, for a while now, a new layer of concrete
is being put in place on this road, which means that one of the lanes is closed
and incoming or ongoing traffic has to wait for the other to make it before
going on, and since the drive is at least 20 minutes, it's a long wait if you're
on the wrong turn. We counted ourselves amongst the lucky incoming cars that
were being allowed by the builders to go on, and passed the poor souls that had
caught the stopped stream. And, after about 40 more minutes, started
catching glimpses of the mountain range, crowned in clouds on its highest point,
and the valley where Gracias sits. On one of the dirt segments of the road,
however, we found our last surprise of this leg of the trip: a piece of rope
tied to a stick on the far side of the road and being held at windshield height
by a child: a road technique I hadn't seen in many years, meant to make cars
slow down and stop and ask the rope-holder to lower it, and be asked for moneyin
return. Effectively, a ransom for the public right of way. Or, in darker cases,
a way of making cars stop and then, ambushed by a concealed group of marauders,
rob their occupants or steal the car itself. Hardened by the many times I found
this road-kidnapping as a passenger before, and scared by the darker
possibilities, I didn't stop but merely slowed down enough for the kid to know I
was willing to leave him a nasty rope burn in the hand, and he also made the
wise decision to lower the rope and save himself the harm, and me the guilt of
having hurt someone out of paranoia.

My first impression of Gracias, apart from the mountain I couldn't stop staring
at to the dissatisfaction of my passengers, was that surely there was a proposal
somewhere in government to rename it Speed Bump Town: the damned things started
on the eastern  outskirts of it and were placed yards apart for the entirety of
the road to the hostel where we were staying, itself on the westernmost
outskirts of town, built annoyingly high and wide to force cars to almost stop
or kiss goodbye their tires and suspension systems. Many curses after, we
alighted from the car onto the parking lot -- right off the highway -- for Café
Jardín: a new hostel that attracts the young and artsy from the fancier cities:
decorated with original artworks donated by urban artists and tastefully
furnished, it boasts clean dorm-type rooms, an entire one of which me and my
three friends were given: for $12 apiece we were going to stay in a place far
cleaner, safer and more attractive than hotels in the bigger cities. And it was
a short walk away from the town and easy to reach since it was outside by the
highway, not inside the town proper amongst its labyrinthine streets. This piece
of cleanness heaven soon appeased my enraged spirits after my experience out
there in Speed Bump Bonanza.

Our original plan was to go explore a hill full of mysterious holes in Intibucá,
but since we took it easy and neither Carlos nor I had been to Gracias before,
we decided to change out of our hiking clothes and into our regular-people
attire and go get lunch in Kaldi's, the in place in Gracias according to our
guides, Marie and Yamil, lured by the promised of a cold Michelada and a _choro_
pizza. Choros, I discovered that weekend, are a species of edible mushrooms
native to the west of Honduras, and which form part of the cuisine of both
Lempira and Intibucá; I also discovered that they're delicious, and developed a
lustful relationship with the Kaldi's way of serving micheladas: in oversized
beer glasses reminiscent of german biergärten, as well as inhaling -- again -- a
sampler of appetizers which included the most decadent chicken wings I've had to
date. In short, Kaldi's more than makes up for the long drive, the speed bumps,
the shady kids with ropes and the strange white dust that baptized my shoes on
the short walk here. This most welcome solace, was not, however, the end of our
pilgrimage.

Revitalized and slightly imbibed, we strolled across the park and up to the San
Cristóbal hill on the outer rim of the town: on top of it sits a star-shaped
fortress that the Spanish used when Gracias was an important city in the colony
(its primacy was taken by Antigua, Guatemala), and from whose beautiful white
walls that contrasted, Greece-like, with the pristine afternoon blue sky, one
can see the whole of Gracias and the mountains behind and beyond, under the
shadow of the still cloudy Cerro Las Minas. We spent some time in the fortress,
taking pictures and making fun of the couples who chose to hike up their to
celebrate Valentine's -- we had forgotten about it, until we saw a fourteen year
old regale his honey with a rose and a handmade banner whose most certainly
corny message we never were able to see, as they hid in one of the little towers
and, hopefully, treated themselves with less corny and more bodily boons.
On our way down we stopped at the park and realized there was a blackout, and,
not wont to walk the half mile to the hostel in the sheer darkness of an unlit
highway, we made our way there before sundown. But, still, we weren't done with
the Sunday.

Weary and relaxed, we decided to go check out the hot springs a few miles
outside of town, owned by the president's brother and reputedly cleaner and less
crowded than the old hot springs on the other end of town. We were greeted by a
cheery security guard who informed us that there was no power, but that they
were open if we didn't mind a badly lit setting. Not caring about such earthly
concerns and, at least on my side, secretly hoping to see some couples taking
advantage of the twilight to cavort in the altogether, we drove beyond the gate
and down into the establishment. As promised, it was dark and dimly lit by a few
scattered oil torches, which gave it a romantic and eerie atmosphere, and, after
taking advantage of the headlamp I packed foreseeing darkness everywhere on
account of the blackout, soon after we emerged in our swimming trunks, ready to
bathe in the very sulphur-infused lifeblood of mother Earth. 

We must have spent an hour or so just gossiping and relaxing in a pool we had
all for ourselves, reveling in the warm water and letting the eyes get used to
the darkness, and then foolishly decided to move to a hotter pool and found
ourselves standing around on a crowded, decidedly lukewarm, pool full of people
who had tried the hotter pool and failed miserably, and decided it was time for
a quick shower on unheated mountain water, a change of clothes in the dark and
back to the hostel.

The people at the hostel, bless their hearts, had cool beer and gas-stove cooked
viands for us to dine with, and dined we did, sipping gossip and babbling beer
until we felt warm inside and cold outside as the temperature dropped. And, with
a merciful return of power halfway through our dinner, we all retired to the
room for a bit of more banter and much needed sleep, before which I settled my
dinner and lodging bill with the owner and drunkenly discussed the virtues of
being a headlamp owner. 

At some point in the wee hours of the night, I woke up with irrational night
terrors about ghosts, or aliens, going through the rooms and inspecting the
lower of the bunk beds, I even had a short episode of sleep paralysis, all the
while I was begging myself to abandon fears I was too old for and to go back to
sleep: my rational mind was more worried about getting enough sleep than aliens,
but that wasn't the one in control during that short episode.  Eventually I fell
back asleep and woke up early for a blessing of the sewage system of Gracias, a
bit of a read and a pleasant shower, after which my roommates started waking up,
too. I felt elated: not only had I gotten enough sleep and survived an alien
invasion, I had for the first time been that one person who smartly wakes up
before everyone, does his morning ablutions and is spared the malarkey that is
to share a restroom and be as desperate as the other to use it. We had decided
to wake up before 4:30 to drive up to one side of the mountain and see the
sunrise, so of course I had woken up at 7 and everyone was ready by 8:40. 

We took breakfast in the hostel, a delicious _típico_ breakfast containing fried
red beans, fried plantain, avocado, fresh cheese and cream, scrambled eggs and
homemade tortillas, accompanied by fruit smoothies -- I must confess I've been
feeling quite hungry writing about all these delicious meals, so expect a break
in the flow of the story as I will surely jump out of my bed and down some form
of pastry soon. Replenished and satisfied with the beautiful day outside, we
paid and vamoosed towards the national park.

The road there is still under construction, but the park itself has a very
convenient pair of cement tracks up the mountain to the visitor's center, and
the center itself is a beauty: tall, angular structures made out of unpainted
concrete with wall-doors resembling tall wooden windows: the "blinds" being
long, thin sections of wood that still has the bark, mixing the modern with the
rugged, a symbol of what a visitor's center should be: a point of transition
between the man made and the organic designs of mother nature. Rudy, the ranger,
briefly told us about the trails using a very informative map as visual aid,
next to which I couldn't help but noticing a sign warning people not to bathe,
wash clothes and _defecate_ in the river that runs next to the nearby sections
of trails and which originates high up on the mountain. That visitors had to be
comically warned by way of a very explicit drawing to not drop their turds on
virgin waters served as a reminder that, despite our abundance of natural
beauty, outdoor education was sorely lacking in Honduras and Leave No Trace was
a philosophy for silly tourists for a lot of people -- I'm looking at you,
despicable polluters of La Tigra here in Tegucigalpa.

We went on the third longest trail in the park: not as incredibly long and
demanding as the ones that go up the mountain, which require camping and a
guide, but still quite a challenge in terms of constant altitude gain. I have to
confess I was feeling very cocky after having walked 26 kilometers in one
morning and survived, so I figured three kilometers up a mountain, no matter how
majestic, would be a piece of cake. 1 kilometer in my clothes were drenched in
sweat, my gatorade bottle -- only source of hydration I brought -- half empty
and my trekking poles deployed and already making my arms sore. It was a helluva
climb. But having seen the river and the changing vegetation, and the tall
mountains ahead, made up for it. We pushed on another kilometer to the second
rest area, on a beautiful plateau bedecked with liquidambar leaves ranging from
green through brown and all shades of yellow and red, with the liquidambar trees
themselves forming a breathtaking overhead mosaic that soon effaced all my
travails and, in the short rest, filled me with the breath of the universe that
one comes to the mountains to seek. And yet again, this time enlivened by life
itself, we walked up an incredibly demanding kilometer, huffing and puffing, to
the trail end: a lookout perched on a side of the mountain, across of which one
can see a majestic waterfall, deep inside the park on the next mountain over, so
far that only a very faint, and probably imagined, purr can be heard, but framed
in such impressive rock faces and seemingly virginal forest that hours of
staring are the least it demands. We took off shoes and food packs and ate
chocolate and seeds as we tried to capture this majesty in photographs, and were
soon swarmed by curious black bees who covered any warm surface that sat still
for long enough, but, thankfully, didn't seem prone to sting like their feisty
yellow and black relatives; and thus, ineffectively dousing ourselves in insect
repellent, we spent a bittersweet long rest lamenting nature and adoring it.

All good things must come to an end, and it was getting quite late, about 2 pm,
we had started at 11 am, so we swiftly made our descent in terrain so easy to
traverse it was hard to believe it was exactly the same trail that had almost
made my heart explode on the way up. Carlos and I were of one mind: get out of
there quickly so we can reach the better lit and maintained main road in
Siguatepeque before sundown, but Marie and Yamil, nursing running knee injuries,
ended up making it to the visitor's center about 20 minutes after us, so all our
hurrying was moot. During our descent, amidst the rhythmic assault of my
trekking poles on rocks and unsuspecting leaves, a topic that had sprung to mind
on the Saturday trek reemerged: it seems like mountaineers who go to the hills
for sport, instead of my vague quasi-religious fletcher-inspired, walking for
the sake of walking and escaping the linear world of man, attack the hills with
fury: the fury of speed, the fury of not being late, the fury of making their
bodies stronger, the human fury of conquering it all; my rapid descent felt
furious: I didn't stop to contemplate the trees, to seek the origin of a
birdsong, to take in the changes in light and vegetation, to hear the murmur of
the river, to feel my lungs expand with the exhalation of the myriad trees
around me; no, it was a race, against nature instead of with it, which I found
myself on one hand proud to be seemingly fit enough to achieve, but on the other
hand sad to be engaged in: it seems necessary to get into such a frame of mind
to cover long distances, to, paradoxically, be away enough from humanity to
abandon its fury. Writing this I realize it taught me that sometimes that fury
which appears loathsome and wholly undesirable, may indeed be used to transcend
our human prison: to use our own traits to go beyond ourselves may be the
blessing that hides beneath the many less lofty consequences our ambition has
fostered; that perhaps even our human ambition, our fury, our ability to conquer
were neutral, tools that could bring us beyond and together with nature and the
rest of life with the same thoroughness we've used them to tear us asunder.

And with these thoughts in my mind, we departed Gracias.

Tired, I let Yamil drive -- and boy, does he drive fast, fast enough for a lazy
cop to stop us, see his papers and let us go -- and in a bit over an hour we
found ourselves parking in La Esperanza and walking to a restaurant Carlos
recommended. 

And we were glad to have done so: they had a whole menu of dishes prepared with
choros, served with delightful sides such as steamed yucca and fresh red beans,
in addition to a regular menu which featured no fewer than three dishes
containing bull's testicles. Not wanting to just let it be a curious but
unexplored path, Yamil went ahead and ordered them, and let us all have a bite:
they were actually delicious, more on account, I'd say, of the heavily
seasoned preparation than their intrinsic flavor, with a texture reminiscent of
kidney but surprisingly slightly less revolting. Having ingested a bite of
another mammal's gonads and quite a big strip of its consort's flank in a choro
sauce, accompanied by another winning michelada, we went off to explore La
Esperanza briefly. At the end of the main street, embedded in the hill that
overlooks the town, is a small shrine to the virgin of Lourdes, quite a curious
sight in itself, and on top of it, reachable through makeshift steps carved in
the rock itself, is a small outlook from which we watched a beautiful sunset
behind the now far-off western mountains, bathing La Esperanza in all the hues
of dusk, and letting us now that we only had about an hour of very dim light
left, which was our cue to continue our trip.

The drive back to the soutbound main road was mercifully devoid of fog, but
sinuous, dark, and unfamiliar, enough to make me achingly alert, and making me
use the high beams almost constantly, and almost as constantly switching them
off for a few seconds as I passed other cars. I was thankful, about two hours
later, to finally reach Siguatepeque and get fewer turns, actual illumination
and actual reflective signage that allowed me to navigate with my low beams
only. Driving back home after a tiresome trip gets you in a strange trance: you
know your body is exhausted, and the dangerous announcement of sleep
periodically reminds you, yet your mind has to constantly convince the rest of
you to remain alert, promising rest soon if the work is done swiftly and
efficiently, and thus a sort of hyper-concentration kicks in: you feel as if
you're performing perfectly, passing slow cars, returning to the right lane
right after, negotiating turns without invading another lane, maintaining a
cruise speed, breaking with enough space to maneuver and other minutia of
driving on a highway; however, you're maybe sloppier than you want to think: on
one segment of the road when I was trapped in the left lane and the car behind
me started harassing me with their high beams, I decided to get off their way by
swerving back to the right lane without looking, and having Carlos -- bless his
heart, so alert, everyone else was asleep -- tell me to stop: another car was
passing me at that very moment, and we had almost hit them. Apart from that,
however, the rest of the driving, while tiresome, was smooth -- or at least, by
lack of further evidence, successfully maintained the illusion of smoothness.

And thus, after dropping people off and dropping other stuff at the facilities
back home and taking a much belated shower, I dropped my own frame on my bed and
slept for, effectively, a week.
