---
layout: post
title:  "Las Golondrinas"
date:   2016-02-08 23:41:00 -0600
categories: tgu essays hiking
location: Tegucigalpa, Honduras
---

I refuse to believe a Sunday morning in Honduras can be truly chilly. So I try
to brew some coffee in my underwear and don't feel entirely comfortable, so I
reluctantly don a light fleece and a base layer I use as pajamas sometimes. It's
a few minutes till seven and I'm scrambling to get some food before taking a
shower: Carlos will pick me up at 8 and, amongst all my friends, he's painfully
punctual -- I'm the exact opposite, though I guess "pleasurably late" isn't
really it. When I come out of the shower, I see a message from him saying he's
on his way; I hustle to get my clothes on -- which thankfully I picked out the
previous night -- and try to leave some minutes for my foot-care routine: while
hiking, your feet are your most precious asset. I'm sporting a new hiking
attire this time around: the gaiter trousers I pined after for a long time, thin
liner socks plus coolmax lightweight quarter length socks, very comfy nylon
boxers and a new shirt. I have to confess I get extremely excited about gear,
which is why my 35L pack has a few new things inside as well: the cool and
scarily sharp norwegian Helle knife that T gave me for my birthday, collapsible
trekking poles, a lightweight emergency kit, an ultralight down jacket if it
ever gets chillier, a water filter, a waterproof match container with only 14 --
also waterproof, matches -- and extra socks; in addition to the gear I always
take: my light rain shell, my emergency bivy sack and tarp, extra batteries and
duck tape, compass, small gorillapod, my small camera, hat, neck gaiter,
sunscreen, food and four large trash bags to clean up the trail a bit: this
particular trail suffers from irresponsible visitors more than the official ones
in the national park.

Las Golondrinas used to be part of the trail system in La Tigra national park,
unlike the other trails which are close to the summit of the park's highest
mountain, this one is closer to the populated areas of the "buffer" zone, and
that proved to be its undoing: after doing work opening trails near the river
and small waterfalls that occur there, and the always mysterious remnants of the
mining operation from the 1800's, the park's administration decided to close it
due to criminal activity: kids from the nearby villages and farms decided it was
quite an easy source of income and goodies to mug visitors, oftentimes with a
machete, ax or other tools of the field. I haven't heard of any fatalities since
after all these seemed to be inexperienced, young kids trying to make a buck out
of people they were sure they would never see again and who wouldn't be able to
trace them in that mountain. The trails are still present though at places
covered in vegetation, and a medium-sized group can feel somewhat safe in there:
oblivious to the criminal element, my first hike with a handful of friends was
in this very place, and it was beautiful: the parts that are near the river feel
wild and remote, some scrambles near the water are demanding but also rewarding
with beautiful vistas of impenetrable forest, a mysterious old quarry full of
orange rock and colorful mud, waterfalls that soothe the weary ear and
occasional mine shafts and derelict trail markers and barbwire. 

Carlos arrives 10 minutes before eight, I'm still getting ready. Water bottle
and lunch bag go in the pack (my mom fixed me a couple of "burritas": delicious
concoctions where layers of single tortillas are interspersed with fried red
beans, scrambled eggs, white cheese and sometimes either meat or chorizo; a
delicacy best served "sweaty": moist with condensation after spending a couple
of hours in a pack under the sun). Carlos announces that we'll be picking up
three _gringas_ of his acquaintance, I feel a pang of misanthropy but acquiesce,
and we end up getting slightly lost trying to find their very secluded and
guarded apartment building in a fancy part of town. They end up being very nice
high school teachers from somewhere in middle America, and we talk a bit about
how I visit NYC sometimes --how one of them visited once, as well-- and about
their hiking experience -- they have way more of it than us.

I'm not sure if it's the Colin Fletcher books I read (in addition to _The
Complete Walker IV_, I recently finished reading _The Secret Worlds of Colin
Fletcher_), but this morning I'm torn between the undeniably good experience of
spending some time with friends and the desire to be alone with the green world.
This is probably exacerbated by the fact that this outing was publicized via a
facebook event and about 14 people said they were attending, being more of a
social thing than a nature thing, which is hard to digest for my idealist
curmudgeon self. I'm not even sure if it's idealism, laziness or something not
really good, not wanting to meet new people while hiking, not being in the
disposition to entertain and get to know, I feel weary and wary of my own kin
and, like a child for whom preposterous plans are not working out well, I sulk
just a tiny bit inside. Well, maybe not only inside: before picking up the three
new girls I told Carlos I didn't really want to meet new people, and I had told
Yamil, who we call from the road as Marie and him were already near the site,
the day before. Which is why when our two cars reached the meeting point -- 30
minutes too early -- we all sort of decided to just go to trailhead and start
hiking, and the others would just find their way.

After we parked in the small soccer field that sits in the end of the road that
also serves as a section of the trail, my paranoid self remembered the criminal
element that allegedly existed here at some point, and I move the knife from my
pack to my pants pocket and feel precisely zero percent safer. This actually
unleashes a whirlwind of unsavory thoughts that refuse to go away as we hike up
to the broken barbwire that we've discovered to get away from the road and
closer to the river and forest; vignettes of wondering how the seven of us could
overpower any marauders and how they would be armed, or trying to make a mental
inventory of what exactly I had packed should I lose my pack and have to buy
everything anew, or if I had backed up my phone recently, or if I would attack
someone with a knife and put everyone in jeopardy by inciting to violence
what would've until then been bluffing, if we had it in us to harm our fellow
man and leave them badly harmed, or worse, for something as commonplace in this
country as petty crime. In short, everything from materialistic concerns to deep
soul searching about human nature and violence took hold of my attention so
strongly that I think I didn't quite pay attention to the first half mile of the
hike -- only feeling somewhat safe in the barren emptiness of the quarry near
the beginning of the wild side of the trail, for some reason. 

The quarry leads to the river, and a after short walk upstream -- with some fun wading
of an impoverished part of the river -- we reach the familiar small waterfall.
Here, a strange phenomenon greets us: cows walking on the steep hill that comes
from the road, crossing the river and walking up to a mysterious trail that we
determined led to private property last time, almost pushing us off the river
on their way, herded by a genial old man. We waited for the slower cows to
finish their hike, and uphill we went, after a bemused photo session of our
bovine hiking comrades. As we walked to the section of the hike that actually
was a trail (the river bit requires some bushwhacking), complete with trail
markers and steps carved out of tree roots, Yamil and Marie got a phone call
from the people we left behind: they're there, and they don't quite know the
trail. They go fetch them, while I stay with Carlos and the three girls: I feel
bad and queasy about these two kids, but they'll be going down what looked like
a busy and innocuous road, whereas we don't know what lies ahead, and the idea
of tourists being attacked doesn't sound great either. Maybe that was a
rationalization, however, maybe I wanted to stay with the larger group in case
something went awry; this latter explanation is what my guilt accused me of on
the trail ahead, and again the whirlwind takes over, fearing for my friends who
left and my new acquaintances and friend who are oblivious to the imagined
danger I fear surrounds us. We push on through the forest to the site where the
waterfall hits the river below, amidst tall and beautiful rock faces and very
tall trees. We've been collecting trash all along and have a bag that's almost
full, so we leave it on the other side of the river before climbing down to this
site, and it was there -- unscathed -- when we came back and walked uphill
through the steep trail to the source of the waterfall. 

We take the familiar road down to the source, and leave our bag on the large
clearing that made a great lunch spot for some other hikers we encountered last
time. While there, we decide to cross the river again and walk through the
forest, see what's out there. We find a small flat area that looks secluded
amongst tall pines and decide it's a great spot for lunch. As we put our packs
down we hear a single howl, a single, youthful, excited, confident,
inequivocally human scream.
Carlos and I are startled, I tell him in a brisk sentence about my fears and
suggest that we try to move along before whomever that was finds us. I see
someone's shirt and legs through the bushes. My heart races, I try to act
nonchalantly and put my trekking pole on the side of my bag and secure it: don't
want to lug two items around if we need to scramble -- or be in some sort of
knife fight I dread and secretly look towards with morbid curiosity. I take
another look at the direction where I knew the stranger was coming from. It's
Yamil, and the rest of our group. I've never felt such relief.

The new guy in that contingent of our group, José Luis, kindly tells us it
wasn't cool to leave them behind, and we agree: my guilt and foreboding weren't
announcing violent crime in the middle of the forest, they were an internal
reprimand for wanting to leave people behind. A friend of Marie's is there with
her kid, a very energetic young lad who seems to be ecstatic to be in the
forest. We take our lunches and, starting to feel chilly, decide to go to a mine
shaft that José Luis knows is just paces away across a small tributary of the
river; we reach it within minutes after negotiating some surprisingly slippery
rocks. He tells us that one can actually go inside and sighs are proffered about
not having a headlamp, but I have one, so the younger members of our group, kid
and his mom included -- the others being Karen and Rey, whom I met via Yamil and
while teaching in college, respectively --  go ahead to explore. The rest of us
take group pictures, the atmosphere somehow much lighter now that we're all
accounted for, and the presence of José Luis, a local who explained that the
muggers are other locals that wouldn't dare attack a large group, less so if
someone that knew them was with them, also dispels the reveries of violence that
assailed me all morning.  After the reconnaissance group returns, in awe of the
glittery innards of the mine shaft, a couple of us decide to go and turn back
after a few minutes of crouched spelunking: a ways in, a thick layer of mud and
small puddles announce sad boots and sadder socks, and no one wants to pay that
price. So back we go, trying to console ourselves with the fact that it was
still pretty neat to see a mine from somewhat inside.

The presence of the toddler means that we can't really bushwhack further up as
we originally planned, and the local says that we wouldn't find the rest of the
national park for three more hours anyway. Not wanting to split the group and
lose the safe cocoon of humanity we had constructed, we go back on the main
road.

At this point we're lugging three bags of trash, and we didn't collect a lot more
near the waterfall that was dangerous to reach. On our way back, since it's a
road that people actually use to go to their places of residence, there's a
plethora of garbage, in particular recurrence we find coca cola bottles and bags
of a brand of chips I hadn't seen before, but which seems to be all the rage up
here. When we reach the populated part of the road, a lady that eyed us for a
while as we walked down offers to take the garbage; we're about to accept her
offer as there's still about a mile of descent to go, but her addendum to the
offer made us queasy about it: she added that she was just going to burn it,
which didn't sit well given the amount of plastic we were lugging around. We
decide to soldier on, and we fill new a jumbo garbage bag in the process.

Back to the cars, we decide to drive up to a spot that only José Luis knows:
it's an easy hike on a small trail that leads through a natural tunnel and
towards some abandoned mining instruments (this ends up being a single
instrument: an old ore filter). There are surprises in this short hike, however:
a beautiful view of the valley that one can see from El Rosario, mysterious
luscious houses and a cabin where a beautifully haired black dog barks at us
incessantly behind a fence, a horse that's tethered to a pole in the middle of
nowhere with whom the kid shares an apple, beautiful dancing trees and two
sections of the forest that are the mirror image of the trail that leads to the
tall waterfall within the national park (I could've sworn they were those spots,
but I checked my phone and we were miles from that trail, strange how nature
sometimes reuses patterns). On our way out, we hung out at an outlook that has a
beautiful view of the foregoing valley and a nice flat area where it looks like
the owners hold summer barbecues. José Luis knows them and says it's fine to hang out
here and take pictures, and even shows us an area further down the hill that
looks perfect for camping.

I'm in a fully social mood at this point, so I actually look forward to driving
back to Valle de Ángeles and having some pizza at an artsy joint where an avant
garde violinist regales the few Sunday patrons with improvisation. We drink some
micheladas and engorge the colorful pizzas that are set before us, while English
and Spanish conversation goes around the table and I make Karen and Rey laugh
uncontrollably with shared memories of our childhoods. We all part ways tired
but content, and Carlos and I drive back to the city with a backseat full of
sleeping americans and Bowie's music accompanying us back to a Tegucigalpa
bereft of traffic on this early Sunday afternoon.

Back home, I reflect on my dichotomies: how I looked forward to this hike all
week, sometimes lost enough in my reveries about it to ignore work, how I also
fantasized about being alone -- or just with my old friends -- out there, how I
wanted to "learn of the green world" and lamented the hand of man: violence,
garbage, water pollution, roads and houses so close to the forest -- the awful
image of a beautiful and tall tangerine bush is tarnished by the fact that all
the ground around it is covered with trash. And, as often happens with any
sojourn out there, the questions that these conflicts made arise don't quite
find answers immediately, they just float around making me dither between
feeling satisfied about how the day turned out despite my expectations and
initial impressions and feeling unaccomplished by not having a "big day out in
nature". Today, however, I feel the outlines of the lesson slowly arise: can I
balance "work life" with the life outdoors, instead of setting them against each
other in a strife for some imagined freedome? Can I reconcile the presence of
man in the world with the silence and timelessness of the wild, instead of
seeing the former as a blight upon the latter that should be purged swiftly and
absolutely? Can I find solace in the silence of the wild while in the company of
others, new or otherwise, without feeling that humanity taints wilderness? Can
insights come from these hybrid experiences, are they actually the only sources
of insight -- real, unexpected life events -- versus idealized, easy, lonesome
eucharists in the forest? Did I take anything away from this day for my
anxiety-ridden existence of late? I'm starting to think I did, after all.
