---
layout: post
title:  "A ride on the F train"
date:   2016-01-15 00:14:00 -0500
categories: jekyll theme
location: Forest Hills, NY
---

I nestle into my parka: this is one of the stations that, being close to the
ground and not very crowded, maintains the chill of the outside winter
temperatures -- versus the smothering vapor barrier in places like union
square; I always forget the very subtle difference between a bit of a walk and a
little stroll that seems to be defined quite precisely by the distance it takes
a body and a mind to traverse from E 28 st to the 23rd street F/M train
station, but unlike other chilly nights, this one remained on just about the
pleasant side of regret. I dismiss the M train and remember, woefully, how I've
taken it late at night, drunk and tired, hedging my bets liberally and just
assuming that the F will be just as slow to take me to the comfort of a bed and
a restroom; tonight, however, I'm sober, early, and just beginning to feel
hungry.
My gaze rests in the past just one bit more: how many times have I taken that M
train, who have I been during those times, where have I been with respect to
myself? The doors close and take my thoughts amongst other commuters who either
travel to somewhere near in Manhattan or have taken the liberal bet early this
evening, and decide to go local, no sleep till Queens.

Reveries come and go as I stare at my kindle before swiping to awaken it and
continuing my voracious consumption of the Complete Walker IV, and the reveries
take the background as the wit of Colin Fletcher and Chip Rawlins make even the
subject of first aid a page turner. A slight tremor, a faint breeze, a migration
of quiet commuters forth into the platform announces the arrival of the F train,
and soon the automated voices that accompany the doors defy subtlety and dare me
to stay within hitting range of the closing doors, I step into the half empty
car, glad to have chosen one that wasn't the temporary residence of an
unfortunate, and sadly malodorous, drifter. One thing I've never been quite able
to get over in this city is the dilemma posed by the harsh reality of the
homeless: as many of my local friends say, there are too many to feel
emotionally invested and help, so I dither between apathy and guilt at that
apathy, between blindness and heart-rending sympathy for a fellow person who, by
misfortunes or bad decisions, has found it inevitable to forego conventions and
just try to steal some warmth, and maybe some charity, in a subway car: that
could be us, or someone we love. I still don't have an answer, nor an antidote
to either their pain or my own. It's a thought I escape from, alas.

Fickle as the mind's eye is, I soon have evaded the depths of human misery again
and engage in more immediate matters, my permanent phobia in NYC: is the seat
I'm on reasonably clean? Will it bequeath me with stains I can't quite commit
to, not with my time and meager skills? In my -- otherwise successful -- survey,
I spot a suspicious stain on the seat right beside be and down on the floor, and
I realize I know this stain: I've spotted it, sat next to it, and wondered about
whence it came and how long ago many times; and I sink into a recurring
reflection: isn't it an instructive insight to realize one's exactly in the same
place that a past copy of oneself has occupied? To fixate the space coordinates
and be able to look down the hazy axis of time and try to look into those minds
again, be those selves again, evaluate who they were and who we are now. It
happened to me in Yoro, during New Years, while visiting my aunt: I've been to
that house many times, as a toddler, an energetic kid, a sulking teenager, an
infatuated college feller, a busy and anxious young professional and a more
content, more relaxed, slightly more composed and slightly older dude. To
realize how much things change and how much they stay the same feels like a rich
opportunity for self-evaluation, for asking oneself The Big Questions; but
perhaps it's a rich setting for luxurious, and fruitless navel gazing. Perhaps
treasures lie there which I haven't realized I've found yet, perhaps it's just
dirt and a regrettable case of losing sight of the world, but whichever it is,
here I am, digging, sitting on a queens-bound F train, whistling David Bowie
songs to myself, hoping a sliver of light comes through whenever I need it, or
you, dear reader. You go there, to your places that repeat, I'll still be there,
digging.
