---
layout: post
title:  "Moonset"
date:   2016-02-02 14:22:00 -0600
categories: tgu essays nyc travel
location: Tegucigalpa, Honduras
---

I look out my window and, in a blue mid-morning sky with just two shy
cloud-strokes, the pale face of the moon is looking back at me. I'm back in
Tegucigalpa, sitting at my desk in my room after a late-ish breakfast, trying to
get used to working from home after three weeks away. This moon is on her way
out, anachronistically lingering in the morning, stuck in her transition between
one night to another, taking her own time to get there, tarrying here just a
little bit more. 

My mind lingers like that moon: my transition between one reality in NYC and
another in Tegucigalpa began yesterday morning as I kissed T goodbye in front of
The Evelyn and embarked on an hour-long journey with an uber driver from
Uzbekistan to JFK. My last conversation in english was about how hard it is to
make ends meet for a married couple that drives Uber for a living, and how they
still try to have little luxuries: buying brand clothing on sale, looking and
feeling good. Then it was the tunnel-vision of airports: lugging my big Gregory
bag, my actual suitcase, my traveler guitar which has been forlorn for two years
almost, and my timpani-packed backpack; checking in at the avianca counter,
making the security line after a young, stressed, mom and little daughter from
Ecuador, heading to the business class lounge which I appreciate only for the
free breakfast with fresh fruit and the incredibly satisfying ability to let my
bowels do their morning dance in the privacy of a single-room restroom: I don't
care for the people there, almost always with an air of entitlement around them,
making me feel despicable too. The in-flight food is good too, as well as the
possibility to use a restroom that gets orders of magnitude less traffic than
the economy one; I feel sympathy for the crew and wariness about my fellow
travelers. All of that, however, takes second stage when food comes and it's
actual shrimp, actual pasta and actual cutlery accompanied by a decent
cabernet-sauvignon and syrah blend and followed by bailey's. I get these
upgrades when avianca gives people the opportunity to get them by making a bid,
I try to bid less money than it would have cost to buy the business class ticket
in the first place, it works most of the time, but I try to get these little
luxuries while I still can: when life gets more real, money will be better spent
than in clean restrooms and actual food while traveling, and I'm at peace with
that -- even though I'm always a tad guilty, a tad ashamed to be traveling like
this.

The next flight has a short wait time, I foolishly try to buy access to the
lounge in San Salvador and the desk operator patronizes me saying that "your
little flight will depart in about 40 mins, I don't think it's worth it". She's
right, but I feel slighted and a bit angry at having to explain that all I want
is just a bit more A/C, a bit more cushioned seats, a bit more free food, before
this trip ends; so instead of I just say a curt "thanks" and leave: I didn't
need the food, nor the restroom, I was being spoiled. Back in the waiting area,
I soon regain composure, but can't seem to shake off the drowsiness: maybe it's
the weather change, maybe it's just traveling, maybe it's the fact that I'm
going from one of my lives to another, but this day feels unreal. I want to
appreciate my fellow travelers, and the people that help us get there, but I
feel an onset of misanthropy, and keep to myself. The lack of disposition to
socialize probably began early in the morning after the stress of security and
boarding: one of the pilots that was flying in business class asked me about my
traveler guitar and, surprisingly, knew who Steve Vai was when I lied about
being able to play his music: I used the incoming wave of people as an excuse to
cut the conversation in one of its lulls and escape to my seat. It could've been
great.

In Toncontín, I'm the only person making the line for Honduran nationals: don't
know if everyone else is a visitor or if people just queued up in whichever line
had people, ignoring the open extra one. The customs officer is a grandma, or at
least a woman in grandma-age, and when I mention I live with my parents she
advices, with a sweet gaze having a sparkle of regret: "From personal
experience, let me tell you: make the best out of the time you have with them".
It's a very personable welcome to Honduras: no longer a land I loath, but a land
I regard as a solace I'm ever so slightly wary of, but also fond. Baggage claim
and customs are easy, no one cares about my oversized backpack or my random
array of camping gear, packed in my regular suitcase -- I always have a paranoid
fantasy that they will think that the things I buy for myself are actually for
sale and will either confiscate them or charge me a high tax, I've always heard
scary stories to that intent and is thus why I always unpack everything new I
buy for me or as presents. 

The trip has ended, it has unwound from the rush of JFK through the
luxury-then-reality of my two flights and then the relaxed atmosphere of a slow
day at Toncontín. A parallel development has taken place in my mind: I went from
waking up next to the woman I love and speaking english to speaking spanish in
JFK and riding next to my dad in his car; from temperatures
close to freezing to warmth, from trying to meet up with friends and navigating
the subway in a concrete jungle to being home most of the time and looking
forward to exploring the wilderness with my motley crew of hiking friends.
Sitting in our living room and talking to my sister, playing with my dog, and
joking with my parents felt like a dream, a memory had while dozing off in a
meeting or while riding the subway next to T.; but it wasn't: I'm back to one of
my lives, and I still wonder what's next for the other, what to take from the 21
intense days I spent there this time, what to bring here, what to plant back in
my life and my love. For now, full of reveries, the moon of my transition sets,
and I push on.
